---
title: "From web to print to web and print"
date: 2022-08-10
draft: false
author: "Julien Taquet"
class:
intro: "Web2print is an amazing concept"
tags:
  - breaking changes
  - guide
  - release notes
---

Web2print is an amazing concept: using the technologies for the web to make things that you can print is a game changer not only in how we leverage the tools we all have for free (or almost) but also in asking ourselves what a document is: is it the format you’re reading or is it the content? Or is it both?

When I was twenty-something, I was reading comics all the time, and the only way to have access to most of the stories was either by spending month to find a second hand issue missing from a collection or to go and buy the trade paperback. Then came the library editions of thoses books with hard covers, a better printing (sometimes), and some times they were oversized. My ultimate editions of Alan Moore’s and Dave Gibbons *watchmen* even has a matching cardoboard box! 

Looking at this from the point of vire of a designerin 2022, this was my first encounter with the concept of responsive: the content needs to be the king, and whatever you choose to read it, you should have the most delightful experience.

We could say the exact same thing about any website today. 

It doesn’t really matter if you experience a website on your small sized phone or if you check it on your huge 45 inches monitor if the content is correclty typeset.




Take two editions of the same book, which one is the real one? The first iteration on the author’s prose? or the addended small sized version? As soon as those two books exist, they will be used in different thesis or document, and will be cited as source, and they will have both their lives.


The craft of book design and typography is all about being invisible to allow the message to pass with the maximum strengh. 
